# History relativity

It was a sunny, hot day in Sydney. At that time I was living in Bondi Beach, next to one of the most iconic Aussie beaches. By the late afternoon I got home, grabbed my board and walked towards the ocean for my daily dose of surfing. Since Bondi was usually overcrowded and that day it wasn't producing any significant waves, I headed south towards Tamarama. From my place it was around 15 minutes walk, but in those pleasent conditions, even though I had to go up the hill it didn't bother me at all. When I arrived at Tamarama I realised the conditions were really good. Only few surfers in the water and nice lines racing towards the shore.

After short stretching I ran into the ocean and shortly got at the break. The session was very pleasent, but at that time in late 2012 I didn't have much experience. To be more precise I haven't had yet caught any open wave. But that was about to change. On the horizon I saw a nice wave that was building up as it got closer and I seemed to be in the perfect position to catch it. Everyone else was either waiting at different breaks or paddling back from the previous ride, so this one was mine. I took the position and slowly started paddling as the wave got closer and closer, finally lifling me up and breaking. Once I felt being pushed I popped up and started riding the wave, that felt different than ever before. Until that day I got myself caught in the whitewash strugling to stay standing as long as possible. This time it was way smoother and easier to keep balance. After few seconds I looked behind me and saw that the wave breaks behind me. In front of me there was a beautiful curved shape of a glassy-like water. I was in the pocket! Finally after all those months of trying I was really surfing. The ride wasn't that long but I still remember how smooth and pleasent it was. That was an amazing day that will stay forever in my memory.

I would call it the `Myth of the first wave` and I picture it in my memory as a magazine-like scenery. I still feel the excitement and pride as I rode the wave. In reality, I doubt it was that perfect. Most likely it was clumsy ride with a very short period in the pocket, that made the impression. But is it really important how it looked like in reality. I built up the myth and it helps me feel good about my surfing. Thanks to this memory, I can point to the moment when I caught my first real wave. Would it be useful to undermine my experience, that was probably crafted by my mind.

I believe, when we look back at the past events it is impossible to get it exactly as it was. We all look at the world through our own lenses and the same event can be seen differently by different people. Often we argue about the events and realise the perspective mismatch and try to find out what really have happened. The same history can be told differently and can put the conclusion into different direction. More time pass, more blurry the situation is and we tend to make it more significant than it really was. But is it that important to get all the details right? I am sure that most of the sotries from the past that build up our nations and societies are far from the reality and sometimes are fully crafted to serve the higher goals. We can argue with it and try to find out, what really happened, but if we think about the goals of those stories it might not be the best idea. I lean towards leaving this job to historians, and keeping the myths that give us some moral and role-models. Greeks had their gods and mythology, we have our own set of stories that we tell ourselves and focusing on the objective reality might not lead us into the best outcome.

I also want to believe my first "real" wave at Tamarama was perfect, open, and almost barreling. From that day I became surfer and I will stick to it. It will be my `Myth of the first wave`.
