# Time to think and read the conditions

I've recently heard one of the executives in my current company explaining his approach to career development. I was pleasantly surprised to hear him draw a comparison to surfing. He said that it is sometimes worth just sitting on the shore, looking at the ocean and what it has to offer and taking a moment before we jump in and catch the waves. Sometimes, when the break we have chosen isn't working well, it can be helpful to gain a fresh perspective and reconsider whether our choices are the right ones. But, on the other hand, we can't stay very long just looking. We need to seize the opportunities that come our way, and even though something better might be on the horizon, to capitalise on what we have at this moment.

Even though I get the point and agree with this thinking, I don't always act this way. For a long time, I thought that with my skills, I didn't need to find the best spot and that wasting time searching for the perfect conditions would end up not surfing at all. So, instead of checking the next place, I assumed the one I'd chosen was good enough. Without much thinking, I put on my wetsuit and headed to the first bank that seemed to be breaking. The more I surf, the more I see this is a mistake. It is essential to take some time and analyse the waves, look for the rips and observe the banks. It is not only about having a good session that time, but also about getting better at reading the ocean. If this choice turns out to be wrong, maybe next time we will make a better decision.

So, my conclusion, for now, is to strike a balance between thinking and acting, and never overdo either. To keep moving, but take some time to sit on the shore looking at the ocean as well. Rather than wasting time hesitating, be aware of your surroundings. Then, I can build confidence and improve my reading of the conditions over time.
